# ISI-BUDS 2022 Research Project Descriptions

## The Role of Maternal Stress Volatility During Pregnancy on Child Health Outcomes, and Real-Time Prediction of Self-Reported Stress in Pregnant Women (2 projects related to the same topic)

### Mentors:	
- Lauren Gyllenhammer, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, UCI
- Pathik Wadhwa, Professor of Psychiatry & Human Behavior, UCI
- Daniel Gillen, Professor of Statistics, UCI

### Background

The relevance and importance of psychological stress for human health is a joint function of a) its prevalence in the population, and b) its penetrance (strength of its effect) on disease risk. It is apparent that the prevalence of psychological stress in the population is substantial; it has been increasing steadily over the past decade (even more so since the COVID-19 pandemic); and it is higher now than ever before, across all populations, including among pregnant women.  Moreover, its distribution across the population is disproportionally higher among socioeconomically-disadvantaged minority groups, and this gap also is increasing.  At the individual level, the detrimental effects of prolonged and excess psychological stress on a range of mental and physical health outcomes are well established.  At the population level, also well-established is the role of chronic psychological stress and stress-related biobehavioral processes as the major effector of the causal pathways linking upstream social determinants with population health disparities.

Over the past 20+ years we have been conducting prospective, longitudinal studies on the role of maternal psychological stress and stress-related maternal-placental-fetal biological mechanisms on pregnancy and birth outcomes, and on fetal programming of newborn, infant and child health outcomes, with an emphasis on phenotypes related to a) obesity, energy balance homeostasis, and metabolic function, and b) structural, functional and behavioral neurodevelopmental outcomes. In more recent studies of sociodemographically-disadvantaged populations, we have addressed the effects of pre-conceptual states and experiences such as maternal exposure to childhood trauma, migration, social standing, and prior miscarriage as determinants of maternal stress and stress biology in the index (current) pregnancy. We have extended this research mechanistically down to the level of the cell, including child telomere biology, mitochondrial function, and epigenetic characteristics.

### Study Design and Data

We conducted a prospective cohort study in a socio-demographically and ethnically diverse population of N=246 pregnant women. We implemented real-time ecological momentary assessment (EMA) sampling of maternal psychological and physiological (heart rate, inter-beat interval, physical activity) processes serially over three 4-day periods in early, mid, and late pregnancy. Subjects provided 10 daily EMA self-reports of psychological stress (approx. 160/subject). We also obtained data on time-variant contextual measures (stage of pregnancy, location, social interactions), and time-invariant maternal characteristics (age, race and ethnicity, socioeconomic status). Compliance with the EMA protocol was very high. Subjects completed over 86% of their prompted diaries and wore an ActiHeart device to collect heart rate and activity for 82 % of the time.

### Project 1: To determine if novel within-subject volatility measures in self-reported maternal stress are associated with newborn size (weight) and body composition measurements
 
The characterization of dynamic and person-specific profiles of stress responses over time are essential for a more comprehensive understanding of the stress response process. The concept of intra-individual variability stems from observations of the impact of stress exposure on multiple facets of individuals’ functionality and behavior across various tasks and contexts. Growing empirical evidence suggests that measures of within-individual fluctuations in stress/negative affect over time, such as measures of affect dynamics/instability (e.g., variability and temporal dependency), constitute a useful prognosticator of emotional dysregulation, a characteristic of many psychopathological states. Thus, the within-person temporal patterning of stress dynamics may serve as a key indicator of susceptibility or vulnerability, and among pregnant women it is possible that high variation in stress may translate into clinical impacts on the fetus. Our goal in this project will be to describe within-subject variation in self-reported maternal stress across pregnancy and then to test the hypothesis that this variation is related to offspring size and body composition measurements (birthweight, % body fat). *This project will rely heavily on data manipulation skills, data visualization methods, causal pathway isolation, linear regression, and logistic regression*.

### Project 2: To utilize a combination of maternal psychological and physiological (heart rate, inter-beat interval, physical activity) combined with contextual and demographic variables can reliably predict high stress time periods in pregnant women

The importance of psychological stress in the context of health/disease risk is well established. Stress is a dynamic process and must be noticed and managed in real time. Despite impressive advances in the area of stress-related biobehavioral mechanisms, current measures remain constrained in their ability to reliably quantify stress dynamics in the real-world setting and capture key features that are prognostic of disease risk, such as onset, peak, recovery, and the magnitude and patterning of temporal fluctuations. This limitation in adequately capturing across- and within-individual stress heterogeneity has important implications for risk identification and providing optimally-timed (just-in-time; JIT) efficacious interventions. Thus, in order to advance precision medicine for managing stress, there is a compelling and as-yet-unmet scientific need for improved approaches for stress measurement. As a first step we wish to determine if we can reliably classify high vs. low self-reported stress episodes and in pregnant females utilizing a variety of psychological and physiological features measured densely over time along with contextual and demographic factors, and to determine if model performance varies by gestational age.  *This project will rely heavily on data manipulation skills, data visualization methods, correlated data methods, mixed effects modeling, and prediction model selection/assessment*.


